ultimately
your concept of yourself is
built out of
the narratives that we create out of our
experience so all of the experiences
that i've had or all the experiences
that you have your idea of tom
is just this
vast collection of
narratives that you've constructed
around your own experiences and it's
layer on top of layer on top of layer on
top of layer and your feeling brain has
a certain valence for those experiences
and so if you want to change how you
feel about yourself you have to start
peeling back those layers of narrative
and start getting down into the deepest
earliest ones because those are often
the most impactful and influential
well you can't leave us with just that
so how do we begin peeling back those
layers man
[Music]
hey everybody welcome to impact theory
today's guest is the new york times
best-selling author of the international
smash hit the subtle art of not giving a
[__] his book which many considered to
be the generation defining self-help
book sold millions of copies was
translated into 25 languages and
absolutely dominated the bestseller list
for a staggering amount of time it's
also been at or near the top of amazon's
most read list continuously since the
chart began and it remains one of the
most downloaded audio books of all time
on audible he's also written for or been
cited by some of the most prestigious
outlets on the planet including time cnn
bbc news business insider yahoo news the
huffington post and many many more
additionally he's published hundreds of
blog articles which are viewed by
millions of people every month making
him one of the most visible and studied
authors of our time
so please help me in welcoming the
founder and ceo of infinity squared
media the author of the recent book
everything is [__] a book about hope
mark manson
welcome to the show
that's a that's a nice intro i should uh
should have you do my my pr
i'd be happy to do it man look the stats
are staggering so putting something like
that together is pretty easy yeah it's
i'm sure that kind of thing really took
you by surprise
but what you've done with it in terms of
really um
giving some self-help that is very
direct and just sort of says it like it
is in a voice that i think people can
relate to is is really amazing and i'm
super excited to have you here and
thanks go into some of these topics yeah
it's good to be here especially the new
book which i think is lovely everything
is [__] that's a nice title certainly
uh catches your attention the thing that
i found most interesting is the talk
about values and like how much values
begin to inform your identity and
basically
your values are essentially who you are
yes take us into that
what does it mean and then how much
malleability is there in values sure
so
my focus in my work has always been
value focused i feel like
in the self-help and self-development
world
there's so much focus on success
you know
getting ahead in your career starting a
business making more money having better
relationships but nobody's actually
standing back and defining what success
is like is our definition of success
valuable or not um
and i think especially in today's
you know crazy internet world where
we're exposed to everything um deciding
what we're choosing to define as success
is is a more important question than
ever before
um
so that's kind of what got me started on
the whole value question in general and
then when i started investigating it and
doing a lot of research and writing
about it i started to discover that like
basically
you know if you think of like how how
you define a person in general um
as humans we tend to define people by
their choices by their actions um
but then what motivates their actions
well often it's how they feel and what
what motivates how they feel about
certain things and it's their perception
of what's valuable and what's not and so
that's kind of how i drilled down
to
to this idea that essentially what we
are is just an aggregation of what we
choose the value in this world if i
value money more than anything else that
will come to define me through my
actions my behaviors what i invest my
time and attention into if i value
family
that will define who i am because
everything else will flow from that
yeah the thing i find interesting about
values is people
often act as if they are empirical
truths like money is valuable or family
is valuable and they don't realize that
it was a choice often handed to them by
the way they grew up their parents with
their parents instilled in them and so
stepping back and recognizing that all
of this is a choice that you can
consciously decide what you're going to
value
and i'd love to hear your thoughts on
how the process works of deciding to
value something so if somebody finds
themselves in a place where they feel
totally [__] up they don't like who
they are and they buy into this notion
that okay a lot of this is being driven
by values
how do they actually change that yeah
it's funny because i'm not a huge fan of
a lot of like kind of the typical
self-help tropes but the answer to this
question i think is kind of classic
visualization
but it's not the visualization that we
usually hear about so
what i talk about in the book is that
you
like let's say let's say i'm just really
superficial and i value money more than
anything like i've got like a fleet of
yachts and it's it's all i care about
you know um
and then something happens in my life
and i realize that
that's pretty superficial i should like
grow up a bit and you know value
something else and
it's not as simple as just deciding like
we've all had that experience in our
lives where
we wish we cared about something that we
don't or vice versa we wish we didn't
care about something that we do and you
can't just stop
um and so the the process that i
described in the book is that
essentially
before you can commit to a new value you
kind of have to like
try them on like like it's like going to
a store and trying on a bunch of pairs
of clothes
um
and the way you try on a new value is
you need to sit down and visualize and
you can even write it out if you want
but it's like let's say all i care about
is my fleet of boats and uh and i want
to try on a new value
um like charity or something
i have to sit down and start asking
myself what would it mean for my life
what would it mean for me as a person if
i didn't value
those boats anymore
and that's a very hard question it
really
it messes us up because we realized that
a lot of our relationships would
probably fall apart a lot of our
business commitments would probably fall
apart
a lot of our understanding of ourselves
would be shaken up or or questioned
and it's a very
difficult thing to ask um
and so
you know most of the times when you see
visualization taught in the self-help
industry it's like they take a guy who
wants a fleet of boats and they say
visualize a fleet of boats now go get it
and it's like no no
what you need to do is take a guy who
wants a fleet of boats and say visualize
not wanting a fleet of boats what would
that say about you who would you be
if that thing you always desired was not
your desire anymore
yeah that to me is really interesting
and you went through a pretty cool
moment like that where you said
ultimately this all comes down to
choices and for a long time in your life
you just always assumed you were going
to be a musician that was like where you
were headed and then
choosing to do the writing instead
and the the thing that really interested
me in that was you said there was a
period of mourning yeah why is there a
period of mourning you know what's going
on as we reshape ourselves so my
background is is a little bit buddhist
and i subscribe to the belief of
no self essentially that that our
conception of who we are is just kind of
this arbitrary imagined thing in our
brain and so
i think of our relationship with
ourselves as being basically functioning
the same way as like our relationship
with another human being
so
when something when you lose a part of
yourself so i spent pretty much all my
my early life
wanting to be a musician that was my
ambition it was my hobby my passion it's
how i spent all my time
and
i went to music school and i just got
the [__] kicked out of me and i was like
oh this is not gonna work anymore and
the process of letting go of that value
was was very much similar to like a
breakup like it felt like losing a
girlfriend or losing a friendship like
this thing that gave all this meaning
and emotion to my life was now
unavailable to me
and whenever you you lose something like
that you go through the same emotional
process which is that a prop that
process of grieving or mourning because
the same way
you know a breakup leaves you grieving
this beautiful thing in your life that
no longer exists when you lose an
important value
or an important part of yourself
you also grieve this beautiful thing
that defines your life and no longer
defines it
yeah that i think is um it's such a
critical thing to understand how your
identity begins to get tied up in all of
this and i think a lot of this hinges on
what you talked about right off the top
which is how we define success yeah so
how do you help people in that so that
they don't succumb to a trap um i know
you're the example that you gave in in
one of your articles i thought was so
hilarious which is the
being driven being ambitious towards
something without taking a moment to
reflect on the morality of what you've
decided to value and you said take
hitler who's one of the most driven
people and has had this tremendous
impact um
but was a psychopath yeah so walk us
through like
you you go pretty into like how we can
sort of reason our way to really having
a base understanding of heard you talk
about kant and like morality at like a
really deep level yeah so how do we
begin to to get to a base level of like
okay now i'm going to stack my belief
system my values on top of this base
sure
um
just a little background on the hitler
thing for our viewers
you think you need to clarify i don't
understand no i've i've wanted for so
long i've wanted i i had this idea with
a friend
we got drunk and went paintballing and
and i
as you do yeah where most my ideas come
from and uh and
i was talking to him i was like you know
what'd be amazing if if you did like uh
if you did like a tim ferris style
podcast with like a fake hitler and
you're like so adolf what's your morning
routine you know like how do you rally
the troops how do you inspire millions
of people and it would just be this
beautiful satire of kind of like
like focusing on that point of like
if so if you're not improving yourself
for the right reasons
you could be damaging yourself
you know the why behind everything
everything you try to improve or
everything that you're driven towards is
is
more important than
actually you know how far you get so for
me it's it's i i see a very direct
connection between
self-improvement and
ethics
i think if you if you dig deep enough
into these questions of of what growth
means or what improvement means you
inevitably run into
what is better period what is better or
worse period what makes a better life
what makes humanity better um
and so it's my goal has always been i
never want to be that guy on stage who's
like
this is what you should do this is how
you do it here's my five step method
blah blah blah you know i i want to be
the guy
who who doesn't
i don't want to give answers i want to
give better questions i want to help
people sort through these questions in
themselves because ultimately
the
these questions around values are so
personal there's there's no way for me
to answer any individual without
inserting my values onto them and when
you do that you rob them of the ability
to choose what matters for themselves
choose their own meaning in their life
um
so for me it's just it's all about just
pointing people in the right direction
pointing out you know little hypocrisy
or little like kind of paradoxes and and
trying to steer them towards um finding
their own answers so give me some of
those better questions and what should
we be asking ourselves um
well you know the the classic thing is
always like you know write down a list
of goals or whatever i i would go past
that i'd say you know
write down your goals and then ask
yourself why do i want each of these
goals
what would it mean in my life if i
accomplish these goals
um similarly you know a common exercise
is like write down things you're
grateful for
um
ask yourself why are you grateful for
them what would happen to your life if
you didn't have them i mean that that's
the crazy thing is that a lot of a lot
of times the things we're most grateful
for
are actually
the things that we're all [__] up
about you know it's like it's
if you had asked me uh uh when i was
um you know
in one like i i had a series of very
dysfunctional relationships
i was happy as a pig and [__] in the
middle of those you know i would be like
oh my girlfriend is the most most
beautiful thing and you know and it's
like no dude like you're i was a mess
um and so we it's not just about
questioning
uh
you know the bad things in our life you
know like why did this painful thing
happen you need to question the good
things as well like why why does this
feel good is it does it feel good for a
good reason
because there are a lot of things that
feel good that are actually hurting you
yeah that's one of the things that i
really want to dive into is so how do we
begin to establish what we think is good
what does it mean to be better um
and you come to this from an ethical
place and i know that you don't want to
like direct people too much and say
believe this or whatever but what are
some jumping off points like is it to go
read philosophy you said that you
approach life as a buddhist like yeah
how can people begin to build that
framework for themselves because what
what i'm really trying to get to is i
feel like you have to have a base belief
of some kind upon which things stack but
i don't think people think about that
yes and
even just pointing them in a direction
of of how to start begin defining that
for themselves i think would be super
helpful yeah so for me i found that
i talk about kant in the book
i was very inspired by kant's moral
philosophy basically he has this
principle called the formula of humanity
which is essentially
it's so simple but it kind of explains
everything he says that
always act in such a way that you never
merely treat people a person as a means
but always as an end um
and what that means is like
don't use people you know like anything
you do
uh
the whole point of what you do what you
do like the end goal of what you do
should always be a person whether it's
yourself or somebody else so like if
you're like kind of misleading somebody
or just saying something to somebody
just to get them to like i don't know
give you some money or
you know make them like you a little bit
um you know under that principle like
that's
that is not growth that is not success
um any basic stuff like lying cheating
stealing like all of those are examples
of using people as a means to some other
end rather than treating the person as
an end in the of themselves um so i i
when i came across that principle it
just
for me it kind of blew me back on just
how universal and powerful and useful it
was um
because in and you know i spent a lot of
time writing about dating and
relationships and
and i
i was coming from a place where i you
know my philosophy around relationships
was always like the thing that screws
relationships up is treating people as a
means is being transactional in your
relationships um
and so when i found that con stuff i was
like
damn this dude gets it
yeah it it is very interesting and if
you had to um and look you've urged
people not to take you too seriously and
so i asked this question
knowing that but like um if you had to
define success in a sentence sure um how
would you define it
i
for me success means um
creating a life and creating a world
with better problems
that's interesting that reminds me of uh
quote of yours i'm going to paraphrase
but um if you want purpose in your life
the most important thing you need to do
is answer honestly the following
question what is your favorite flavor of
[__] sandwich
which i thought was absolutely
phenomenal that is the absolute right
question but what do you mean by that uh
it's basically
anything you pursue like our mind plays
this little trick on us which is
uh
when we want something our our our brain
only shows us the good side of it it
doesn't show the sacri the sacrifice
required for it um and everything every
experience you have in life
there is a
[__] sandwich part of it you know
there's there's everything has its
associated problems um
but our brain doesn't think about that
when we're pursuing it and so uh for me
like one of the most powerful heuristics
is to simply instead of thinking about
what benefits i want uh in my life i try
to think about what problems do i want
in my life um you know it's something as
simple as like you know people might see
this show and they're like oh damn i
wish i had a
badass show like that on youtube you
know it's like they don't understand
like there's a whole crew here there's
logistics there's like waivers you gotta
get like clear through lawyers and all
sorts of crap and it's like those are
the problems you chose you know those
are the problems that you wanted to have
and that's why it's a successful show
it's not just because it's like oh damn
having a show would be awesome you know
like it's easy to just want something
so yeah your whole concept around
struggle i think is really powerful
you talk really interestingly about
emotions in the book you go into the um
newton's uh emotional laws
that were really interesting
why is it so important especially as it
relates to willpower to understand your
emotions to leverage them
um but at the same time when you talk
about emotions there's an inherent sense
of like don't always trust your emotions
sure so untangle this emotional knot for
us
emotions are are
messy for a lot of reasons but but one
of the the key things that i talk about
is
i use i use this analogy of a car if
your consciousness is a car
you have two brains in it you have a
feeling brain and a thinking brain and
most people's assumption is that the
thinking brain
is the responsible one driving and the
feeling brain is like the bratty little
kid in the passenger seat screaming and
pointing at stuff out the window and
it's like it's the job of your thinking
brain to like
keep two hands on the wheel and be like
shut up shut up trying to drive here you
know and it's
as a culture we look at anybody who
fails to control their impulses or their
emotions
as somebody as somebody who's just
fundamentally failing
to drive their own car
we see it as a failure of willpower and
discipline
but the truth is if you if you dig into
all the psychological literature
it's the feeling brain is actually
driving the car
and
he's a little bit crazy he's like i i
compare him to like an angry boyfriend
who refuses to stop for directions like
he just wants to go wherever he wants to
go and he's not going to listen to
anything and the thinking brain is
actually in the passenger seat like our
conscious mind is a passenger in our own
behavior who has deluded himself into
thinking that he's driving even though
he's not
and what i talk about is that the power
of the thinking brain is that we get to
draw the map the thinking brain gets to
decide what what the lay of the land is
so even though we don't
totally have control over
uh
what's pushing us forward our actions
our emotions all those things we do have
control over
the meaning and the interpretation of
those actions and emotions and so
what i talk about is that
to develop a real sense of control in
your life
to feel that feel a sense of
self-discipline it's not about beating
your emotions in the into submission
because that that just causes greater
neuroticism and compulsion
the trick is is that you got to get the
two brains to talk to each other
um and and it's hard because they speak
different languages you know so it's
instead of like just trying to get your
feeling brain to shut up
you need to ask your feeling brain well
how does this make you feel you know
it's like oh how how does waking up at 5
a.m and going to the gym feel the
feeling brains be like oh that feels
awful like why would you ever do that
and and then the thinking brain needs to
be like okay okay that's okay you know i
hear you um
but why does it feel bad you know what
about 6 a.m feeling brain's like well
that's not as bad
you know and it would feel nice to work
out i guess you know and so you it
becomes this like negotiation between
the two sides of yourself and um and
there are a lot of like kind of mental
tricks
to
coax to like kind of work with your
emotions to leverage your emotions
and get get the feeling brain pointed in
the direction you want it
rather than just fighting it for your
entire life yeah i love that i want to
go farther on that so um going back to
the [__] sandwich the whole idea of like
what are the things you actually want to
struggle with yeah um
how do we
like think of willpower in terms of
aligning with the things that are hard
that you enjoy and i think that your own
example of i thought i wanted to be a
musician but writing was the thing that
made me lose track of time like i feel
like that
does a great job of addressing this yeah
i think
there are things in our lives where we
don't even i think the things that we
tend to be passionate about we don't
even realize we're passionate about them
because they seem so
normal and obvious to us so for instance
to use to use the music and the writing
example i remember when i was in in
music school
i was
practicing i played guitar so i was
practicing like six hours a day
just beating my head against the wall
trying to learn all these different
songs and stuff and i just i hated it it
was a grind and it felt like a job i was
supposed to do and i remember actually
right before i quit i uh there was a
there was a kid in the program who was
like
you know he was an all-star like he
everybody knew he was gonna make it you
know um and it's funny today i think he
has two or three grammys but um
so like i found him in the cafeteria and
i sat down with him and i'm like oh man
like i don't know like how do you can
you give me some advice man he's like
yeah sure what's going on i'm like
how do you practice this much like i'm
practicing like six hours a day
you know how much are you practicing
he's like yeah six hours a day and i'm
like but yeah but how do you like stay
motivated
how do you like what's your warm-up like
you know like how do you how do you
schedule your practice time and he's
just looking at me like i'm speaking
klingon like he's he's like
what are you talking about like
i just practice like i always practice
like whoa
it didn't even compute for him
and then i was like okay i i should
probably quit um
[Laughter]
so jump ahead like five six years i
started blogging
and i would go to these like internet
marketing conferences and stuff and
people would start coming up to me and
they're like oh man i love your blog man
like your articles they're they're like
10 20 pages long you're posting like
multiple each week and i'm like yeah
thanks they're like man it's incredible
so uh
you know what's your writing regimen
like like
how do you get yourself motivated you
know it starts asking me all these
questions and i'm like looking at him
like what are you talking about like i
just write
you know i just sit down and write you
know i don't even have to think about it
and uh
and it kind of like rung a bell in my
head of like wait a second like that's
that's that's something that's like
that's a signal that there's something
special about this because for whatever
reason
what seems to cause other people a lot
of stress and pain
comes easily to me
and what
causes me a lot of stress and pain you
know
came easily to to the guy who did make
it through music school
um and so i realized that it's it's not
about like grit or willpower or just
like wanting it enough it it's a lot of
it too it's just
we're all
masochists a little bit you know like we
all there's some pain in the world that
we all
it gets us off a little bit and
i found mine
and uh
and so yeah i just you just you just
keep hitting that [__] like you just
keep going and um
i think people when they're when you're
so focused on pleasure and and pleasant
rewards you don't actually get to that
question you don't actually get to like
yeah what's what's that pain that like
actually kind of gets me going you know
and
because we all have it and that that's
that's the sweet spot when you can find
it
yeah that's really interesting i love
how much you um sort of orbit around
emotions and how people can really get
in connection with what using my own
language would be sort of the
neurochemical reality of what you're
doing
walk us through the the three
newton's three laws of emotions i found
these to be really really interesting
speaking of gravitational pull i've
always found newton's life super
fascinating because
not only was he like one of the smartest
guys ever but when you read about his
life like he was
a total head case like had a very
traumatic childhood
suffered a lot of abuse and just was
very anti-social and emotionally
dysfunctional his entire life um and so
i thought it would be really cool to
kind of use him and his life as an
example to demonstrate a lot of these
topics that we're talking about you know
in terms of uh identity growth
self-discipline
etc
and so i took his three laws of motion
and i basically just created emotional
analogs of those so the first one was uh
um
for every action there's an equal and
opposite emotional reaction and this is
basically just the idea that
every emotion is simply a
response to
either pain or the absence of pain
so when you remove pain from life
a positive emotion emerges in reaction
and if you add pain into life a negative
emotion uh emerges um the second one so
the second one if i remember right was
our self-worth equals the sum of our
emotions over time so
you could even you might even say like
identity equals our emotions over time
so
basically let's say
something traumatic happens in your
childhood um
that
that pain early on in your life causes a
lot of negative emotions and one of the
things that i talk about is that anytime
we feel an emotion it compels us to
to do what i call equalizing which is um
like if i'm angry at you i'm gonna
continue to be angry at you until
i either
get you know retaliate or you apologize
like something needs to happen to make
that anger go away there needs to be
some sort of like equalization between
us
and if there is no equalization that
anger just kind of simmers and sits
there
uh forever and
one of the reasons why
childhood traumas are so debilitating
for people is that essentially these
extremely painful experiences occur
to our feeling brains
while our thinking brains are still
undeveloped and don't know how to
explain or create meaning around that
pain
so let's say something really painful
happened to me now i'd be like oh well
you know
he meant well and
you know [__] happens or whatever but if
i'm like a five-year-old my explanation
for it only gets as far as like i'm a
bad i'm a bad boy i'm a bad person and
the world hates me you know like that's
and that will stick um
because it doesn't get equalized and
i'll stick for the rest of my life and
the problem is is that we forget that
that painful thing happens so we just
kind of go through life
with this
feeling of inferiority and pain that
lingers that
we can't really put an explanation to or
explain away
and so the process of therapy is
basically
unraveling a lot of our
experiences until we get back to that
original experience and with our adult
thinking brain we can now put meaning to
that pain that is helpful to us
essentially
so that's the second law is that our
identity is is the sum of our emotions
over time um
and then the third law is uh our
identity will continue to be our
identity until
new experience acts against us so to use
the music school example um i was a
musician i would introduce myself as a
musician and then i got to second
semester music school and um
and had my ass handed to me and suddenly
i'm like oh [__] i'm not a musician
anymore you know and now i have to go
around and it's like i'm not a musician
i don't know what i am but it required
there was some new contrary experience
that was required
to create that shift within me and and
this is why identity change
by definition
needs to be
painful and uncomfortable
because if it's not painful or
uncomfortable
uh
nothing's changing nothing's shifting
there might be a perception of a change
but
ultimately the only way our values
change is that
uh
life knocks us on our ass a little bit
and causes us to question
everything we understand
yeah the whole process of
losing an identity
mourning that
trying to
find or create a new sense of self i
think is uh one very misunderstood
and two really really critical
you talk about people breaking away and
quote unquote finding themselves in a
moment of crisis walk us through that
and i'd love to
hear if that's what you were doing
you're so well traveled yeah 60 plus
countries speak three languages was that
a part of that redefinition for you were
you seeking experience like how do you
advise people who are they don't know i
don't know if i'm a writer i don't know
if i'm a musician i don't know what [__]
sandwich i enjoy like yeah yeah you know
how do you help people through that
process i think there's an exploration
phase um
because it's it's if you have this
identity you have this perception of who
you are and then suddenly that's yanked
away from you there's kind of just this
void there
um and so i think there needs to be an
exploration to find
basically find your [__] sandwich
essentially and
it takes time it takes patience and i
think they're
probably the most helpful thing you can
do is just be okay with not knowing
let's talk about building resilience you
said something early that i found really
interesting which is that you have a
relationship with yourself the way that
you have with somebody else yeah which
is
really fascinating tell me about that
like what do you mean by that and and
then like the whole notion of i forget
the exact word you used but you said i
approach this like a buddhist the self
is an illusion i don't think you said
that but it was like it made me feel
that way yes yes yes i i said it's an
arbitrary construct which yeah illusion
um
i think uh
so our relationship with ourselves like
essentially what
self-esteem is or self-worth is
basically let me back up for a second
the feeling brain so the thinking brain
thinks in terms of like logic cause and
effect correlations things like that the
feeling brain thinks in terms of
importance
um it thinks in terms of values so
some things are very valuable and worthy
of our of being pursued and other things
are very
very
not valuable and they're they should be
avoided
and the feeling brain kind of designates
you know almost a value score for
everything every experience every
potential experience that we we can
consider
including ourselves so
our
idea of what our self is is just another
idea the same way
um you know
being
living in new york is an idea and i
there is a certain value i place on that
and that that idea has logical
connections to all sorts of things that
who i am as mark manson is simply a
constructed idea in my mind and as a
constructed idea my feeling brain has
either positive or negative
valuations and feelings for for
mark manson
when people have a low valuation of
themselves when they have when their
feeling brain thinks that their identity
is not valuable and and
have negative emotions about it uh we
call that low self-esteem and when
our the idea of our self ha our feeling
brain has a high valuation of it and has
positive feelings for it we call that
high self-esteem and so a lot of like
therapeutic work for many decades
was kind of almost obsessed of like just
trying to get people people's this
relationship between your feeling brain
and your conception of your identity to
get it to get the needle to move from
negative to positive
because there are all sorts of you know
positive
repercussions of that um but ultimately
that your your concept of yourself is
built out of
um
the narratives that we create out of our
experience so all of the experiences
that i've had or all the experiences
that you have you know your idea of tom
is just this
vast collection of
uh
narratives that you've constructed
around your own experiences and it's
layer on top of layer on top of layer on
top of layer and your feeling brain has
a certain
you know valence for those experiences
um
and so if you want to change how you
feel about yourself you have to start
peeling back those layers of narrative
and start getting down into the deepest
earliest ones because those are often
the most impactful and influential
well you can't leave us with just that
so how do we begin peeling back those
layers man like i'm so with you on that
yeah and the way that people construct
their sense of self and beliefs and
values and it's like this just crazy
rat's nest of
unidentified unexplained
beliefs feelings reactions long-held
wounds that have never been dealt with
from your childhood i mean it's
but but that act of peeling that stuff
back i think is also an act of rewriting
yes so it's like ah i've identified this
narrative
now what narrative do i change it to
yeah and so going back to your your
driving analogy you've got this thinking
brain whose job is to basically rewrite
the map of a past experience yeah
how do you help people take control of
that or do you have thoughts around how
they can take control of that are there
like i i would say i have a very strong
thesis about whatever you rewrite like
the guiding principle should not be a
guiding principle of objective truth
because i think people are atrocious
at figuring out what is actually
objectively true sure so if you could
that would be amazing but since you
can't focus entirely on what's
empowering so using your language what
moves the needle to something positive
yeah do you have a guiding principle
that you tell people to utilize when
thinking about that rewriting process
i think
so everybody's a little bit different
and this is how i see like therapy
meditation journaling like a lot of
these therapeutic practices like
i see them they're all different
versions of what you just said it's like
peeling that layer back looking at it
being like huh maybe that's not true
what what if this idea was true instead
like trying on new
uh narratives and in stories that define
ourselves um
so everybody
you know everybody kind of has their own
you know
practice that will resonate with them
more
um but it's in terms of like how to
actually go about it i think the first
step is to
just decide that you don't actually know
who you are again it's the buddhist
thing it's like the self's an illusion
it's an arbitrary construct that you've
spun up uh over the course of your life
and so it's just this thing it's just
this idea it's a subjective
uh it's a subjective idea and it can be
anything you want now you don't that
doesn't mean you necessarily like wanna
become delusional and decide that you're
spider-man and and you're going to be
president of ukraine like it's you want
to
be you want to be tethered to reality
but also understand that you don't like
you said you never know for certain
who you actually are you don't actually
know what's true you don't know if
you're a good person or a bad person you
don't know
if you're a musician or an author i
could label my label myself anything so
i think when we we start to realize that
at how
uh kind of lose that certainty about who
we are what we think we know about
ourselves that kind of like
it starts to loosen the glue of that
that ball that ball of yarn of stories
that we've told ourselves
and once that glue is loosened you can
more easily pull pull threads out
and start to see like oh well yeah
that's
that's definitely not
you know that's probably not the most
helpful narrative that i could create
for myself
so i guess i guess that would be the
second step you know first step lose the
certainty second step is to actually
like pull on some of these threads and
then um
and then question you know what if that
wasn't true like what if
what if music school didn't kick my ass
what if i just
what if i just didn't
try hard enough you know like
could be true what would that mean about
me it's useful to sit down and think
think through those things because
it's by doing that
enough
that you you start to stumble upon
epiphanies and and like big realizations
about what you've been telling yourself
your whole life we have to understand
that
our identities are are not logically
constructed they are emotionally
constructed and they are emotionally
constructed based on our feelings and
they are they have an inertia to them to
bring it back to the newton's laws our
identities have an inertia to them that
uh
is extremely difficult to stop or
reverse
um
and you you definitely can't do it just
through
logical arguments or
you know punishing somebody so how the
hell do we put ourselves in those
difficult situations like how do we seek
them out
i think uh
i think it's it's
it's just a healthy habit to develop the
desire to challenge yourself in every
sense physically mentally emotionally um
you know one thing i
definitely started trying to do
especially recently given like the
political climate that's been going on
is i seek out
articles and news sources that i
disagree with
um
because i i see
the the bubbles that everybody's in and
the tribal lines that everybody's
drawing and i am
i'm horrified by it but i also want to
try my best to not succumb to that
myself and so
um
yeah i read sources i read books of
things i disagree with and and it's and
it changes me it it really does it it
softens me
um sometimes i'll finish the book and
i'm like well i still don't agree with
them but damn i respect them now like
that's a smart person
and so that that's one way i do it
intellectually
but i think it's you know that carries
over
into all areas of life i mean it's as
simple as
you know if you go to the gym it's like
challenge yourself to do something new
take a class that
you know like my wife just at the age of
37 decided she want to learn how to swim
and she's like mortified of it you know
but i'm like hell yeah go do it you know
like that's because it's not just about
swimming it's it's about just developing
that consistent habit of like
stepping into your discomfort
i love that who was who was it that you
you quoted them they said either to
their daughter or niece it was a famous
writer i think um that the whole
idea of getting better at life is about
surrounding yourself with people that
disagree with you or don't think like
you think
yeah i'm putting you on the spot here
but i thought that was such an
interesting idea about getting yourself
around disconfirmation getting yourself
around people that shake you out of your
cognitive biases i think that's really
powerful man i really think in this book
you're on to some of the most
fundamental and important things that a
human being can do
to change who they are i think it is
super powerful and way extraordinary i
have no doubt that the
author hat author identity is a good
identity for you um where can people
find you where can they get the book so
website is markmanson.net there's
hundreds of articles there
encourage people to check it out
book is available everywhere
every story you can imagine it should be
there so go check it out um and i will
be doing a speaking tour
across u.s canada and hopefully
australia and uk
um so you can learn about that go to
either go to my facebook page which is
facebook slash markmansonnet or
markmanson.net
book dash tour
nice
all right what's the impact that you
want to have on the world
i want
to expand and
i basically i just want to
challenge people
i want to challenge people to find new
perspectives and to keep i think if you
look at what human progress is
it's ultimately rooted in the the search
and the
discovery and the testing of new
perspectives and taking the same
experience and
rewriting the meaning around it and so
um i see my work very much as training
brains to do that better
i like that a lot my man thank you so
much for coming on the show that was
absolutely extraordinary guys if you
haven't already be sure to subscribe and
until next time my friends be legendary
take care
brother that was amazing thank you good
[__]
what's up impactivists if you want to
acquire new skills or improve the ones
you already have then you're going to
love this as you know a huge part of my
life is about acquiring skills that have
utility and exist in service of
something greater than myself and that
is why i highly recommend skillshare
skillshare is an online learning
community with over 25 000 classes
across more skills than you can imagine
at impact theory we've used skillshare
for things like project management
marketing analytics and even for our
comic book and today skillshare is
giving the first 500 people who click on
the link in the description two free
months to their entire library of
courses that's 60 days access to
literally thousands of courses on
whatever topics you choose for no money
at all you just have to click on the
link in the description below and join
the classes that work for you and you
will be in very good company as one of
seven
million people on skillshare and should
you decide to stick around beyond your
free trial an annual subscription to
skillshare is less than 10 dollars a
month that's nothing for a skill that
could very well change your life so go
ahead and click on the link in the
description below to start acquiring
those skills today and until next time
my friends be legendary take care
i want to influence them i want to get
inside your skin inside your brain and
alter how you look at the world i think
this
change in your perspective and how you
look and socialize and deal with people
will radically alter so many aspects in
your life